Under Western Stars is a 1938 American Western film directed by Joseph Kane and starring Roy Rogers, Smiley Burnette, Carol Hughes, and the Maple City Four. Written by Dorrell McGowan, Stuart E. McGowan, and Betty Burbridge, the film is about a populist singing cowboy who decides to run for Congress in order to seek federal assistance to help small ranchers regain their water rights during the Dust Bowl of the 1930s. His campaign comes into conflict with greedy water company executives.The film was the first starring role for Rogers, made under contract to Republic Pictures during a walkout by the studio's singing cowboy Gene Autry. The picture was filmed on location in the Alabama Hills of Lone Pine, California. The film's song "Dust", written by Johnny Marvin, was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Song. In 2009, Under Western Stars was selected for the National Film Registry by the Library of Congress for being "culturally, historically or aesthetically" significant and will be preserved for all time.


== Plot ==
John Fairbanks' water company refuses to allow free water for the farmers and ranchers. When Roy Rogers and his men overpower the dam's guards and release the valve on the water, a sympathetic judge fines Roy one dollar and convinces him to follow in his father's footsteps and run for the United States House of Representatives. Roy wins the election and fights his best to have the Federal Government step in to solve the dire situation. Roy is encouraged and secretly helped by John Fairbanks feisty daughter, Eleanor.


== Cast ==
Roy Rogers as Roy Rogers
Smiley Burnette as Frog
Carol Hughes as Eleanor Fairbanks
Maple City Four as Singers
Guy Usher as John Fairbanks
Tom Chatterton as Congressman Edward H. Marlowe
Kenneth Harlan as Richards
Alden Chase as Tom Andrews
Brandon Beach as Senator Wilson
Earl Dwire as Mayor Biggs
Jean Fowler as Mrs. Wilson
Dora Clement as Mrs. Marlow
Dick Elliott as William P. Scully
Burr Caruth as Larkin
Slim Whitaker as Tremaine
Jack Rockwell as Sheriff
Frankie Marvin as Deputy Pete


== References ==


== External links ==
Under Western Stars essay [1] by Howard Kazanjian and Chris Enss at National Film Registry
Under Western Stars at IMDb
Under Western Stars at the TCM Movie Database
Under Western Stars at AllMovie
Under Western Stars at the American Film Institute Catalog
Under Western Stars is available for free download at the Internet Archive
Under Western Stars essay by Daniel Eagan In America's Film Legacy, 2009-2010: A Viewer's Guide To The 50 Landmark Movies Added To The National Film Registry In 2009-10, Bloomsbury Publishing USA, 2011, ISBN 1441120025 pages 60–63 [2]
