Pasties (singular pasty or pastie) are patches that cover a person's nipples and areolae, typically affixed with adhesive. Though pasties are commonly associated with strippers, burlesque shows and erotic entertainment, they are also, at times, worn as an undergarment, beachwear, or as a form of protest during women's rights events such as Go Topless Day that may avoid potential prosecution under indecency laws.


== Design ==

Pasties come in a variety of colors, shapes, and sizes, typically  not much larger than the areola. Pasties are usually applied with a special tape or glue fixative, often gum arabic.  However, in some situations keeping pasties from falling off can be an issue, as can be their removal. Some people are allergic to some adhesives or pastie material. Due to this, most high quality pasties are made of hypoallergenic silicone and use special adhesives to reduce the chances of an allergic reaction. Some pasties are for single-use, while others are washable and can be reused.
Pasties are sometimes worn with a sideless bikini bottom such as a C-string held by an internal flexible frame. Alternatively a vulva cover, commonly known as a merkin pastie, can be attached with adhesive. These pasties for the genitalia are known as maebari in Japanese.


== Entertainment ==
Pasties emerged in burlesque and striptease in the 1920s as a way to avoid breaking the law by performing topless or nude. Pasties came to be regarded by some as more aesthetic and erotic. They were worn in cabarets such as the  Folies Bergère and  Le Lido. Burlesque performer Carrie Finnell is attributed with adding tassels which hang from the center and incorporating tassel twirling as part of a performance.In parts of the United States, erotic dancers wear pasties in strip clubs to avoid prosecution under local public indecency laws. In extreme cases, liquid latex pasties are used to comply with local laws, raising criticism by strippers that lawmakers are engaging in cruelty by requiring use of adhesive material on the nipple. Such restrictions generally applied in Chicago until Chicago City Council changed the city's liquor license statutes in 2020, removing references to gender. Women working in the city's topless-only restaurants and strip clubs are no longer required to affix pasties or use other latex coverings on their breasts.Pasties are worn by many neo-burlesque performers and are also found in night clubs, fetish parties and parades, such as pride parades.
Pasties were and may still be worn by some actresses while filming an otherwise apparently topless or nude scene, which is not caught by the camera angle.


== Underwear ==
Some who choose to go braless (often the most practical choice with a strapless or backless dress) may wear pasties, so that their nipples and areolae are not visible through sheer clothing or lingerie, or in case they experience a nipple erection. 
Some people wear pasties to avoid fissure of the nipple (colloquially known as "runner's nipple"), irritation caused by chafing by fabric such as a Tshirt. When worn under clothing pasties are sometimes called breast petals or nipple covers.


== Swimwear ==
Pasties are occasionally worn on beaches to maximize a sun tan, short of being topless or nude, and avoid the strap lines which bikinis produce. Swimwear named strapless bikini (not to be confused with bandeau bikini tops) or no-string bikini is a combination of pasties with a matching maebari-style bottom.


== Athletes ==
Runners, surfers, and other outdoor athletes may notice fissure of the nipple; ways to avoid or mitigate this irritation include nipple guards, which cover the nipple and prevent friction with clothing. 


== Gallery ==

		
		
		
		
		


== See also ==

Topfreedom
Nipple shield (jewelry)
Nipple shield (breastfeeding)
Merkin


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Pasties (clothing) at Wikimedia Commons
